Add array observers deprecation (#779)
ember-learn/deprecation-app: content/ember/v3/array-observers.md

---
id: array-observers
title: Array Observers
until: '4.0.0'
since: 'Upcoming Features'
---

Array observers are a special type of observer that can be used to synchronously
react to changes in an `EmberArray`. In general, to refactor away from them, these

> reactions need to be converted from _eager_, _synchronous_ reactions into _lazy_

Reviewer: I think from-to may sound better.

```suggestion
reactions need to be converted from _eager_, _synchronous_ reactions to _lazy_
```

reactions that occur when the array in question is _used or accessed_.

> For example, let's say that we had a class which wrapped an `EmberArray` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's say that we had a class that wrapped an `EmberArray` and
```

converted its contents into strings by calling `toString()` on them. This class
could be implemented using array observers like so:

```js
class ToStringArray {
  constructor(innerArray) {
    this._inner = innerArray;

    this._content = innerArray.map((value) => value.toString());

    innerArray.addArrayObserver(this, {
      willChange: '_innerWillChange',
      didChange: '_innerDidChange',
    });
  }

  // no-op
  _innerWillChange() {}

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

  _innerDidChange(innerArray, changeStart, removeCount, addCount) {
    if (removeCount) {
      // if items were removed, remove them
      this._content.removeAt(changeStart, removeCount);
    } else {
      // else, find the new items, convert them, and add them to the array
      let newItems = innerArray.slice(changeStart, addCount);

      this._content.replace(changeStart, 0, newItems.map((value) => value.toString()));
    }

    // Let observers/computeds know that the value has changed
    notifyPropertyChange(this, '[]');
  }

  objectAt(index) {
    return this._content.objectAt(index);
  }
}
```

> To convert this to no longer use array observers, we could instead convert the

Reviewer: I think it may sound a bit odd that the word convert is mentioned twice. Maybe,

```suggestion
To move away from array observers, we could instead convert the
```

> wrapping to happen when the array is accessed in `objectAt`, using the `@cached`

Reviewer: Can you clarify what "convert the wrapping to happen" means? I didn't quite understand from the code below.

Author: `_content` is accessed lazily, and so it wraps the inner values when the user actually accesses them via `objectAt`. By contrast, array observers would have wrapped eagerly, when the object was actually pushed into the array. Does that make sense?

decorator from [tracked-toolbox](https://github.com/pzuraq/tracked-toolbox).

```js
import { cached } from 'tracked-toolbox';

class ToStringArray {
  constructor(innerArray) {
    this._inner = innerArray;
  }

  @cached
  get _content() {
    return this._inner.map((value) => value.toString());
  }

  objectAt(index) {
    return this._content.objectAt(index);
  }
}
```

> This can also be accomplished with native [Proxy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy),
> allowing your users to interact with the array using standard array syntax

Reviewer: I'd write 2 sentences to keep grammar simple.

```suggestion
This can also be accomplished with native [Proxy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy).
Your users can interact with the array using standard array syntax
```

instead of `objectAt`:

```js
class ToStringArrayHandler {
  constructor(innerArray) {
    this._inner = innerArray;
  }

  @cached
  get _content() {
    return this._inner.map((value) => value.toString());
  }

  get(target, prop) {
    return this._content.objectAt(prop);
  }
}

function createToStringArray(innerArray) {
  return new Proxy([], new ToStringArrayHandler(innerArray));
}
```

This solution will work with autotracking in general, since users who access the
array via `objectAt` will be accessing the tracked property. However, it will
not integrate with computed property dependencies. If that is needed, then you
can instead extend Ember's built-in `ArrayProxy` class, which handles forwarding

> events and dependencies itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
events and dependencies.
```

```js
import ArrayProxy from '@ember/array/proxy';
import { cached } from 'tracked-toolbox';

class ToStringArray extends ArrayProxy {
  @cached
  get _content() {
    return this.content.map((value) => value.toString());
  }

  objectAtContent(index) {
    return this._content.objectAt(index);
  }
}
```

#### Converting code that watches arrays for changes

Array observers and change events can be used to watch arrays and react to
changes in other ways as well. For instance, you may have a component like

> `ember-collection` which used array observers to trigger a rerender and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ember-collection` that used array observers to trigger a rerender and
```

          didChange: '_needsRevalidate'
        });
      }
      this._rawItems = rawItems;
      var items = A(rawItems);
      this.set('_items', items);

      if (items && items.addArrayObserver) {
        items.addArrayObserver(this, {
          willChange: noop,
          didChange: '_needsRevalidate'
        });
      }
    }
  },

  willRender() {
    this.updateCells();
  },

  updateCells() {
    // ...
  },

  actions: {
    scrollChange(scrollLeft, scrollTop) {
      // ...
      if (scrollLeft !== this._scrollLeft ||
          scrollTop !== this._scrollTop) {
        set(this, '_scrollLeft', scrollLeft);
        set(this, '_scrollTop', scrollTop);
        this._needsRevalidate();
      }
    },
    clientSizeChange(clientWidth, clientHeight) {
      if (this._clientWidth !== clientWidth ||
          this._clientHeight !== clientHeight) {
        set(this, '_clientWidth', clientWidth);
        set(this, '_clientHeight', clientHeight);
        this._needsRevalidate();
      }
    }
  }
});
```

We can refactor this to update the cells themselves when they are accessed, by
accessing them into a computed property that depends on the items array, and

> which updates the cells when it is accessed:

Reviewer: I found this sentence hard to parse. Can you break the sentence into 2 or 3 instead?

```js
export default Component.extend({
  layout: layout,

  init() {
    this._cells = A();
  },

  cells: computed('items.[]', function() {
    this.updateCells();

    return this._cells;
  })

  updateCells() {
    // ...
  },

  actions: {
    scrollChange(scrollLeft, scrollTop) {
      // ...
      if (scrollLeft !== this._scrollLeft ||
          scrollTop !== this._scrollTop) {
        set(this, '_scrollLeft', scrollLeft);
        set(this, '_scrollTop', scrollTop);
        this.notifyPropertyChange('cells');
      }
    },
    clientSizeChange(clientWidth, clientHeight) {
      if (this._clientWidth !== clientWidth ||
          this._clientHeight !== clientHeight) {
        set(this, '_clientWidth', clientWidth);
        set(this, '_clientHeight', clientHeight);
        this.notifyPropertyChange('cells');
      }
    }
  }
});
```

Mutating untracked local state like this is generally ok as long as the state is

> essentially a cached representation of computed or getter is deriving in

Reviewer: I was confused by "getter is deriving". Was "is" meant to be included in the sentence?

general. It allows you to do things like compare the previous state to the
current state during the update, and cache portions of the computation so that
you do not need to redo all of it.

> It is also possible that you have some code which must run whenever the array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible that you have some code that must run whenever the array
```

has changed, and must run eagerly. For instance, the array fragment from

> `ember-data-model-fragments` has some logic for signalling to the parent record

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ember-data-model-fragments` has some logic for signaling to the parent record
```

that it has changed, which looks like this (simplified):

```js
const StatefulArray = ArrayProxy.extend(Copyable, {
  content: computed(function() {
    return A();
  }),

  // ...

  arrayContentDidChange() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    let record = get(this, 'owner');
    let key = get(this, 'name');

    // Any change to the size of the fragment array means a potential state change
    if (get(this, 'hasDirtyAttributes')) {
      fragmentDidDirty(record, key, this);
    } else {
      fragmentDidReset(record, key);
    }
  },
});
```

Ideally the dirty state would be converted into derived state that could read

> the array it was dependent upon, but if that's not an option or would require

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the array it depended on. If that's not an option or would require
```

major refactors, it is also possible to override the mutator method of the array
and trigger the change when it is called. In EmberArray's, the primary mutator
method is the `replace()` method.

```js
const StatefulArray = ArrayProxy.extend(Copyable, {
  content: computed(function() {
    return A();
  }),

  // ...

  replace() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    let record = get(this, 'owner');
    let key = get(this, 'name');

    // Any change to the size of the fragment array means a potential state change
    if (get(this, 'hasDirtyAttributes')) {
      fragmentDidDirty(record, key, this);
    } else {
      fragmentDidReset(record, key);
    }
  },
});
```

Note that this method will work for arrays and array proxies that are mutated

> directly, but will not work for array proxies which wrap other arrays and watch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directly, but will not work for array proxies that wrap other arrays and watch
```

changes on them. In those cases, the recommendation is to refactor such that:

1. Changes are always intercepted by the proxy, and can call the code
   synchronously when they occur.
2. The change logic is added by intercepting changes on the original array, so

>    it will occur whenever it changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   it will occur whenever the array changes.
```

3. The API that must be called synchronously is instead driven by derived state.
   For instance, in the example above, the record's dirty state could be driven

>    by the various child fragments it contains, and updated whenever the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   by the various child fragments it contains. The dirty state could be updated whenever the user
```

        items.addArrayObserver(this, {
          willChange: noop,
          didChange: '_needsRevalidate',
        });
      }
    }
  },

  willRender() {
    this.updateCells();
  },

  updateCells() {
    // ...
  },

  actions: {
    scrollChange(scrollLeft, scrollTop) {
      // ...
      if (scrollLeft !== this._scrollLeft || scrollTop !== this._scrollTop) {
        set(this, '_scrollLeft', scrollLeft);
        set(this, '_scrollTop', scrollTop);
        this._needsRevalidate();
      }
    },
    clientSizeChange(clientWidth, clientHeight) {
      if (
        this._clientWidth !== clientWidth ||
        this._clientHeight !== clientHeight
      ) {
        set(this, '_clientWidth', clientWidth);
        set(this, '_clientHeight', clientHeight);
        this._needsRevalidate();
      }
    },
  },
});
```

We can refactor this to update the cells when they are accessed. We'll do this
by calling `updateCells` within a computed property that depends on the items
array:

```js
export default Component.extend({
  layout: layout,

  init() {
    this._cells = A();
  },

  cells: computed('items.[]', function() {
    this.updateCells();

    return this._cells;

>   })

Reviewer: Let me add the comma here.
```suggestion
  }),
```
